Add `AccessManager` guide (#4691)
OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/access-control.adoc

Reviewer: I think we should consider renaming this whole page to Access Management instead of Access Control, and then talking about AccessManager first as the recommended approach for any projects that will become complex. WDYT?

I like how "Better role management can be achieved with an xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] instance. Instead of managing each contract's permission separately, AccessManager stores all the permissions in a single contract, making your protocol easier to audit and maintain."

Author: I proposed this to Fran but he disagreed. I think the section is fine defined as "Access Control" because it refers to the broader AccessControl category in security, and I'd be worried for the SEO y we change it.

Operations executed by the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController[`TimelockController`] are not subject to a fixed delay but rather a minimum delay. Some major updates might call for a longer delay. For example, if a delay of just a few days might be sufficient for users to audit a minting operation, it makes sense to use a delay of a few weeks, or even a few months, when scheduling a smart contract upgrade.

The minimum delay (accessible through the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController-getMinDelay--[`getMinDelay`] method) can be updated by calling the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController-updateDelay-uint256-[`updateDelay`] function. Bear in mind that access to this function is only accessible by the timelock itself, meaning this maintenance operation has to go through the timelock itself.

[[access-management]]
== Access Management

> Although xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] offers a more dynamic solution for permissioning your contracts, decentralized protocols tend become more complex after integrating new contract instances, requiring to keep track permissions in each one. This increases complexity of uniformly monitoring and updating permissions across the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] offers a more dynamic solution for permissioning your contracts, decentralized protocols tend to become more complex after integrating new contract instances, requiring to keep track permissions in each one. This increases the complexity of permissions monitoring and management across the system.
```

image::access-control-multiple.svg[Access Control multiple]

> These protocols often require a single main interface to manage all roles, while keeping the benefits of delaying access control operations and the same built-in rules for assigning and revoking roles.

Author: Rewrote to:

> Protocols managing permissions in production systems often require more integrated alternatives to fragmented permissions through multiple `AccessControl` instances. 

Also adapted the next part a bit

This is accomplished with an xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] instance; a contract to store multiple smart contract permissions. Instead of managing each contract separately, it allows managing access from a single contract, making your protocol easier to audit and control.

image::access-manager.svg[Access Manager]

> The manager allows granting permissions to a role, scoped by contract (called target) and https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.20/abi-spec.html#function-selector[function selector] (called function). In this model, each role is allowed to call multiple functions in different contracts. Similarly, a role can be granted to multiple addresses, and a single address can be granted with multiple roles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The AccessManager is designed around the concept of role:

* Roles are granted to accounts (addresses) following the many-to-many approach. This means that each user can have one or multiple roles, and that multiple users can have the same role.
* Access to a restricted function is restricted to one role. A function is defined by one https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.20/abi-spec.html#function-selector[function selector] on one contract (called target). 

For a call to be authorized, the caller must bear the role that is assigned to the current function (contract address + function selector).```

image::access-manager-functions.svg[Access Manager functions]

=== Using `AccessManager`

> Contracts includes xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`], it can be deployed and used out of the box. It sets an initial admin in the constructor, who will be allowed to perform management operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] is available in the `@openzeppelin/contracts` package and can be deployed and used out of the box. It sets an initial admin in the constructor, who will be allowed to perform management operations.
```

Author: Not sure about this one. It follows the same logic of product-introduction across the docs (eg. "OpenZeppelin Contracts provides ..." in Ownable and AccessControl)

Author: I rewrote it to:

> OpenZeppelin Contracts provides xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`].

> For a fresh new contract, you must implement the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged[`AccessManaged`] contract provided along with the manager for matching permissions. This contract should define an Access Manager instance as its xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-authority--[authority]. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to restrict access to some functions of your contract, you should inherit from the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged[`AccessManaged`] contract provided along with the manager. You will have to set the addess of the Access Manager instance (xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-authority--[authority]) in the constructor. This will provide `restricted` modifier that you can use to protect any public-facing function. 
```

Here's a simple example of an xref:tokens.adoc#ERC20[`ERC20`] token that defines a `mint` functionality that is restricted by an xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`]:

```solidity
include::api:example$access-control/AccessManagedERC20MintBase.sol[]
```

NOTE: Make sure you fully understand how xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] works before using it or copy-pasting the examples from this guide.

Once the managed contract has been deployed, it is now under manager's control, which will get the minter role assigned to an address and also allow such role to call the `mint` function.

```javascript
const MINTER = 42n; // Roles are uint64 (0 is reserved for the ADMIN_ROLE)

// Allow the minter role to call the function selector
// corresponding to the mint function
await manager.setTargetFunctionRole(
    myToken.address,
    ['0x40c10f19'], // bytes4(keccak256('mint(address,uint256)'))
    MINTER,
    { from: initialAdmin }
);
```

> Even though each role has its own list of permissioned functions. Each address granted with a role (called member) will have an execution delay that will dictate how long the account should wait to execute a function allowed to its role. Delayed operations are possible by using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] functions.

Reviewer 2: > Even though each role has its own list of permissioned functions.

Something is missing here.

Author: It's a comma:

> Even though each role has its own list of permissioned functions, each address granted with a role (called member)

Just fixed

> Even though each role has its own list of permissioned functions. Each address granted with a role (called member) will have an execution delay that will dictate how long the account should wait to execute a function allowed to its role. Delayed operations are possible by using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though each role has its own list of permissioned functions. Each address granted with a role (called member) will have an execution delay that will dictate how long the account should wait to execute a function that requires its role. Delayed operations must first be xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] on the Access Manager before they can be executed, either directly or using the Access Manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function.
```

> Additionally, each role granted to a member will have a granting delay before it takes effect. This is how you can set roles with a granting and execution delay:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, roles can have a granting delay, that prevents for adding new members immediatly delays granted to a member will have a granting delay before it takes effect. The administrator of the Access Manager can set this grant delay as follows:
```

Author: The suggestion looks like there's an extra section not removed. I updated with a sentence similar to yours, let me know if it's ok

```javascript
const HOUR = 60 * 60;

const GRANT_DELAY = 24 * HOUR;
const EXECUTION_DELAY = 5 * HOUR;
    
await manager.setGrantDelay(MINTER, GRANT_DELAY, { from: initialAdmin });
await manager.grantRole(MINTER, EXECUTION_DELAY, { from: initialAdmin });
```

You may notice roles do not define a name. Opposed to the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] case, roles aren't hardcoded in the contract as `bytes32` values but identified as numeric values. However, role labeling allows tooling discoverability for easier role exploration and it can be achieved using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-labelRole-uint64-string-[`labelRole`] function.

```javascript
await manager.labelRole(MINTER, "MINTER");
```

> It's recommended to keep only a single admin address secured under a multisig or governance layer. To achieve this, it is possible for the initial admin to set up all the required permissions, targets and functions, assign a new admin and finally renouncing to the admin role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's recommended to keep only a single admin address secured under a multisig or governance layer. To achieve this, it is possible for the initial admin to set up all the required permissions, targets and functions, assign a new admin and finally renouncing its admin role.
```

> Finally, the manager comes with a configurable `close` mode. When enabled by admins, it restricts every call to any managed contract while keeping permissions intact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, the manager includes a mode where administrators can completelly closing a target contract. When closed, all calls targetting this contract are forbidden. When a contract is closed (or reopened), all the other settings for this contract are preserved. In particular, the roles required for calling specific functions are not modified. This mode is usefull for energency operations that require temporarily shutting down a contract in order to evaluate concerns and reconfigure permissions.
```

```javascriot
// Token's `restricted` functions closed
await manager.setTargetClosed(myToken.address, true);

// Token's `restricted` functions open
await manager.setTargetClosed(myToken.address, false);
```

WARNING: Consider that even if a manager defines permissions for a contract function. These won't be applied if the managed contract instance is not using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManageddf-restricted--[`restricted`] modifier or if its manager is a different one.

=== Role Admins and Guardians

An important aspect of the AccessControl contract is that roles aren't granted nor revoked by role members. Instead, it relies on the concept of a role admin for granting and revoking.

> In the case of the AccessMananger, the same rule applies and only each role admin is able to call xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-grantRole-uint64-address-uint32-[grant] and xref:api:access.doc#AccessManager-revokeRole-uint64-address-[revoke] functions. Note that calling these functions will be subject to the execution delay the executing role admin has.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of the AccessMananger, the same rule applies and only role's admin are able to call xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-grantRole-uint64-address-uint32-[grant] and xref:api:access.doc#AccessManager-revokeRole-uint64-address-[revoke] functions. Note that calling these functions will be subject to the execution delay the executing role admin has.
```

> Additionally, the access manager stores a _guardian_ an extra protection for each role and it is given the ability of canceling operations that have been scheduled by any role member with an execution delay. Consider that a role will have its initial admin and guardian default to the `ADMIN_ROLE` (`0`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the access manager stores a _guardian_ as an extra protection for each role. This guradian has the ability to cancel operations that have been scheduled by any role member with an execution delay. Consider that a role will have its initial admin and guardian default to the `ADMIN_ROLE` (`0`).
```

IMPORTANT: Be careful with the `ADMIN_ROLE` members, since it acts as the default admin and guardian for every role, even a misbehaved guardian can cancel operations at discretion, affecting the manager operation.

=== Manager configuration

> The manager contract provides a built-in interface for configuring permission settings. These functions can be accessed for those addresses member of the `ADMIN_ROLE`, which is constantly defined as `0` for all managers.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand that sentence. It may be better to split it into multiple simpler ones.

Author: I rewrote it to:

> The manager contract provides a built-in interface for configuring permission settings that can be accessed by the manager's `ADMIN_ROLE` members.

Reviewer 2: I still tink its confusing. 

Are you trying to say:
> Members of the `ADMIN_ROLE` can also configure additional settings.

Reviewer 2: > provides a built-in interface

That part I'm really not sure about. I'm not sure what you are trying to say. What is a "built-in interface" ?

Author: > What is a "built-in interface" ?

Thanks for concretely pointing out what's confusing.
What I'm trying to convey is that the manager has a set of functions to manage permissions. Instead of managing timelocks separately to roles in different contracts, the manager's interface is enough.

These functions include:

* Add a label to a role using the xref:api:access.doc#AccessManager-labelRole-uint64-string-[`labelRole`] function.
* Assign the admin and guardian of a role with xref:api:access.doc#AccessManager-setRoleAdmin-uint64-uint64-[`setRoleAdmin`] and xref:api:access.doc#AccessManager-setRoleGuardian-uint64-uint64-[`setRoleGuardian`].
* Set each role's grant delay via xref:api:access.doc#AccessManager-setGrantDelay-uint64-uint32-[`setGrantDelay`].

As an admin, some actions you can make will require a delay. Similar to each member's execution delay, some admin operations require waiting for execution and should follow the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] workflow.

> These delayed functions are settings scoped to a target, so each target will have a different admin delay that can be adjusted by admins with xref:api:access.doc#AccessManager-setTargetAdminDelay-address-uint32-[`setTargetAdminDelay`]. These actions are:

Reviewer 2: > These delayed functions are settings scoped to a target

I don't understand that part.

Author: I'm trying to imply that because these functions are for configuring the settings of target contracts, each target will have a different admin delay. I rewrote it to:

> More specifically, these delayed functions are those for configuring the settings of a specific target contract. The delay applied to these functions can be adjusted by the manager admins with xref:api:access.doc#AccessManager-setTargetAdminDelay-address-uint32-[`setTargetAdminDelay`].

Operations executed by the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController[`TimelockController`] are not subject to a fixed delay but rather a minimum delay. Some major updates might call for a longer delay. For example, if a delay of just a few days might be sufficient for users to audit a minting operation, it makes sense to use a delay of a few weeks, or even a few months, when scheduling a smart contract upgrade.

The minimum delay (accessible through the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController-getMinDelay--[`getMinDelay`] method) can be updated by calling the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController-updateDelay-uint256-[`updateDelay`] function. Bear in mind that access to this function is only accessible by the timelock itself, meaning this maintenance operation has to go through the timelock itself.

[[access-management]]
== Access Management

> Although xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] offers a more dynamic solution for adding permissions to your contracts, decentralized protocols tend to become more complex after integrating new contract instances, requiring keeping track of permissions in each one. This increases the complexity of permissions management and monitoring across the system.

Reviewer: "offers a more dynamic solution" ... than what? Than Ownable?

"requiring keeping track of permissions in each one." --> "requires you to keep track of permissions separately in each contract."

> Although xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] offers a more dynamic solution for adding permissions to your contracts, decentralized protocols tend to become more complex after integrating new contract instances, requiring keeping track of permissions in each one. This increases the complexity of permissions management and monitoring across the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] offers a more dynamic solution for adding permissions to your contracts, decentralized protocols tend to become more complex after integrating new contract instances and requires you to keep track of permissions separately in each contract. This increases the complexity of permissions management and monitoring across the system.
```

image::access-control-multiple.svg[Access Control multiple]

Protocols managing permissions in production systems often require more integrated alternatives to fragmented permissions through multiple `AccessControl` instances. 

> Better role management can be achieved with an xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] instance. Instead of managing each contract's permission separately, AccessManager stores all the permissions in a single contract, making your protocol easier to audit and maintain.

Reviewer: Mentioned above, but I think our recommended best practice should come first.

image::access-manager.svg[Access Manager]

The AccessManager is designed around the concept of role:

> * Roles are granted to accounts (addresses) following a many-to-many approach. This means that each user can have one or multiple roles and multiple users can have the same role.

Reviewer: For what purpose? Flexibility?

Author: Yes. Specifically, the intention was to reduce as much as possible the amount of interactions required when modifying permissions and the most likely to change are the permissioned addresses.

Now that I mention it, we added Multicall to this contract for batched permission changes, shall we mention it?

> * Access to a restricted function is restricted to one role. A function is defined by one https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.20/abi-spec.html#function-selector[function selector] on one contract (called target). 

Reviewer: Which one is the truth?

> * Access to a restricted function is restricted to one role. A function is defined by one https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.20/abi-spec.html#function-selector[function selector] on one contract (called target). 

Author: Very good observation, I should've used addresses in the diagram.

The truth is that access to a restricted function is allowed to only a single role.

> * Access to a restricted function is restricted to one role. A function is defined by one https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.20/abi-spec.html#function-selector[function selector] on one contract (called target). 

Author: Just changed the image. I think it's clearer now.

For a call to be authorized, the caller must bear the role that is assigned to the current function (contract address + function selector).

image::access-manager-functions.svg[Access Manager functions]

=== Using `AccessManager`

OpenZeppelin Contracts provides xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`]. A contract that can be deployed and used out of the box. It sets an initial admin in the constructor who will be allowed to perform management operations.

> In order to restrict access to some functions of your contract, you should inherit from the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged[`AccessManaged`] contract provided along with the manager so that the `restricted` modifier is available to protect any externally facing function. Note you will have to set the address of the Access Manager instance (xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-authority--[authority]) in the constructor so the `restricted` modifier can check permissions by calling the correct manager.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to restrict access to some functions of your contract, you should inherit from the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged[`AccessManaged`] contract provided along with the manager so that the `restricted` modifier is available to protect any externally facing function. Note you will have to set the address of the Access Manager instance (xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-constructor-address-[`initialAuthority`]) in the constructor so the `restricted` modifier can check permissions by calling the correct manager.
```

Reviewer: This is a beginner question, but does this mean that the AccessManager needs to be the deployed _before_ the other contracts, so you have an on-chain address you can refer to?

Author: Yes, but you can change the authority afterwards. There are some cases where the manager can be deployed afterwards:

- We saw some usage of the [`IAuthority` interface from Dappsys]. Contracts out there can migrate easily from a DS Authority to the Access Manager even if it's deployed afterwards.
- For Ownable and Access Control, the manager can be deployed afterwards and then be granted permissions on them.

> In order to restrict access to some functions of your contract, you should inherit from the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged[`AccessManaged`] contract provided along with the manager so that the `restricted` modifier is available to protect any externally facing function. Note you will have to set the address of the Access Manager instance (xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-authority--[authority]) in the constructor so the `restricted` modifier can check permissions by calling the correct manager.

Reviewer: I agree it's okay to sometimes use `AccessManager` and AccessManager. 

Based on our launch guidance, it should always be one word, no spaces, capital A capital M. AccessManager.

> In order to restrict access to some functions of your contract, you should inherit from the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged[`AccessManaged`] contract provided along with the manager so that the `restricted` modifier is available to protect any externally facing function. Note you will have to set the address of the Access Manager instance (xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-authority--[authority]) in the constructor so the `restricted` modifier can check permissions by calling the correct manager.

Author: Same as https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/pull/4691#discussion_r1383429678

Here's a simple example of an xref:tokens.adoc#ERC20[`ERC20`] token that defines a `mint` functionality that is restricted by an xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`]:

```solidity
include::api:example$access-control/AccessManagedERC20MintBase.sol[]
```

NOTE: Make sure you fully understand how xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] works before using it or copy-pasting the examples from this guide.

> Once the managed contract has been deployed, it is now under the manager's control, which will get the minter role assigned to an address and also allow the role to call the `mint` function.

Reviewer 3: We should point out that we are starting to talk about client-side Javascript code. e.g.:
```suggestion
Once the managed contract has been deployed, it is now under the manager's control. The initial admin can then assign the minter role to an address and also allow the role to call the `mint` function. For example, this is demonstrated in the following Javascript code:
```

Author: I'd like to keep it as pseudocode as possible because ideally, we should provide examples in each library (viem/ethers).

I'd rather merge this and then focus on being library specific in all the documentation pages. We also have [this issue](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/issues/4619)

Author: After chatting with Zack we decided to ship the Ethers.js example but we're tracking a larger issue to provide actual code snippets in all our documentation.

```javascript
const MINTER = 42n; // Roles are uint64 (0 is reserved for the ADMIN_ROLE)

// Allow the minter role to call the function selector
// corresponding to the mint function
await manager.setTargetFunctionRole(

>     myToken.address,

Reviewer: Let's make it proper code if we're publishing it.

>     myToken.address,

Author: Corrected.

    ['0x40c10f19'], // bytes4(keccak256('mint(address,uint256)'))
    MINTER,
    { from: initialAdmin }
);
```

> Even though each role has its own list of function permissions, each role member (`address`) will have an execution delay that will dictate how long the account should wait to execute a function that requires its role. Delayed operations must be xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`d] first on the Access Manager before they can be executed, either directly or using the Access Manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function.

Reviewer 3: Formatting is off, probably because of schedule'd. Maybe change to something like:
```suggestion
Even though each role has its own list of function permissions, each role member (`address`) will have an execution delay that will dictate how long the account should wait to execute a function that requires its role. Delayed operations must have the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] function called on them first in the Access Manager before they can be executed. This `schedule` call can occur either directly or using the Access Manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function.
```

Reviewer 3: > either directly or using the Access Manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function.

It's not clear what "directly" is referring to.  Is it referring to the `schedule` call?

Author: Changed for "calling the target function" instead.

Additionally, roles can have a granting delay that prevents adding members immediately. The Access Manager admins can set this grant delay as follows:

```javascript
const HOUR = 60 * 60;

const GRANT_DELAY = 24 * HOUR;
const EXECUTION_DELAY = 5 * HOUR;
    
await manager.setGrantDelay(MINTER, GRANT_DELAY, { from: initialAdmin });
await manager.grantRole(MINTER, EXECUTION_DELAY, { from: initialAdmin });
```

> You may notice roles do not define a name. Opposed to the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] case, roles aren't hardcoded in the contract as `bytes32` values but identified as numeric values. However, role labeling allows tooling discoverability for easier role exploration and it can be achieved using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-labelRole-uint64-string-[`labelRole`] function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You may notice roles do not define a name. As opposed to the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] case, roles aren't hardcoded in the contract as `bytes32` values but identified as numeric values. However, role labeling allows tooling discoverability for easier role exploration and it can be achieved using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-labelRole-uint64-string-[`labelRole`] function.
```

> You may notice roles do not define a name. As opposed to the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] case, roles aren't hardcoded in the contract as `bytes32` values but identified as numeric values. However, role labeling allows tooling discoverability for easier role exploration and it can be achieved using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-labelRole-uint64-string-[`labelRole`] function.

Reviewer: Only if this is technically correct

```suggestion
Note that roles do not define a name. As opposed to the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] case, roles are identified as numeric values instead of being hardcoded in the contract as `bytes32` values. It is still possible to allow for tooling discovery (e.g. for role exploration) using role labeling with the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-labelRole-uint64-string-[`labelRole`] function.
```

```javascript
await manager.labelRole(MINTER, "MINTER");
```

> It's recommended to keep only a single admin address secured under a multisig or governance layer. To achieve this, it is possible for the initial admin to set up all the required permissions, targets, and functions, assign a new admin, and finally renounce its admin role.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps provide a reason why this is recommended.

For improved incident response coordination, the manager includes a mode where administrators can completely close a target contract. When closed, all calls to restricted functions in a target contract will revert.

Closing and opening contracts don't alter any of their settings, neither permissions nor delays. Particularly, the roles required for calling specific functions are not modified.

This mode is useful for incident response operations that require temporarily shutting down a contract in order to evaluate emergencies and reconfigure permissions.

```javascript
// Token's `restricted` functions closed
await manager.setTargetClosed(myToken.address, true);

// Token's `restricted` functions open
await manager.setTargetClosed(myToken.address, false);
```

> WARNING: Even if a manager defines permissions for a contract function, these won't be applied if the managed contract instance is not using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManageddf-restricted--[`restricted`] modifier for that function, or if its manager is a different one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: Even if an `AccessManager` defines permissions for a contract function, these won't be applied if the managed contract instance is not using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManageddf-restricted--[`restricted`] modifier for that function, or if its manager is a different one.
```

=== Role Admins and Guardians

An important aspect of the AccessControl contract is that roles aren't granted nor revoked by role members. Instead, it relies on the concept of a role admin for granting and revoking.

> In the case of the AccessMananger, the same rule applies and only the role's admins are able to call xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-grantRole-uint64-address-uint32-[grant] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-revokeRole-uint64-address-[revoke] functions. Note that calling these functions will be subject to the execution delay that the executing role admin has.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of the `AccessManager`, the same rule applies and only the role's admins are able to call xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-grantRole-uint64-address-uint32-[grant] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-revokeRole-uint64-address-[revoke] functions. Note that calling these functions will be subject to the execution delay that the executing role admin has.
```

> Additionally, the access manager stores a _guardian_ as an extra protection for each role. This guardian has the ability to cancel operations that have been scheduled by any role member with an execution delay. Consider that a role will have its initial admin and guardian default to the `ADMIN_ROLE` (`0`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the `AccessManager` stores a _guardian_ as an extra protection for each role. This guardian has the ability to cancel operations that have been scheduled by any role member with an execution delay. Consider that a role will have its initial admin and guardian default to the `ADMIN_ROLE` (`0`).
```

> IMPORTANT: Be careful with the members of `ADMIN_ROLE`, since it acts as the default admin and guardian for every role. A misbehaved guardian can cancel operations at will, affecting the manager's operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Be careful with the members of `ADMIN_ROLE`, since it acts as the default admin and guardian for every role. A misbehaved guardian can cancel operations at will, affecting the `AccessManager`'s operation.
```

Reviewer: What do we mean by "a misbehaved guardian"?

Author: A guardian is implicitly able to DoS the role is guarding. By "misbehaved guardian" we're referring to an address granted with a role (guardian of another) that cancels every operation from its guarded role members.

=== Manager configuration

> The manager contract provides a built-in interface for configuring permission settings that can be accessed by the manager's `ADMIN_ROLE` members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `AccessManager` provides a built-in interface for configuring permission settings that can be accessed by the `AccessManager`'s `ADMIN_ROLE` members.
```

This configuration interface includes the following functions:

* Add a label to a role using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-labelRole-uint64-string-[`labelRole`] function.
* Assign the admin and guardian of a role with xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setRoleAdmin-uint64-uint64-[`setRoleAdmin`] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setRoleGuardian-uint64-uint64-[`setRoleGuardian`].
* Set each role's grant delay via xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setGrantDelay-uint64-uint32-[`setGrantDelay`].

> As an admin, some actions you can make will require a delay. Similar to each member's execution delay, some admin operations require waiting for execution and should follow the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an admin, some actions will require a delay. Similar to each member's execution delay, some admin operations require waiting for execution and should follow the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] workflow.
```

More specifically, these delayed functions are those for configuring the settings of a specific target contract. The delay applied to these functions can be adjusted by the manager admins with xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setTargetAdminDelay-address-uint32-[`setTargetAdminDelay`].

The delayed admin actions are:

> * Update a managed contract xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-authority--[authority] using xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-updateAuthority-address-address-[`updateAuthority`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Updating an `AccessManaged` contract xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-authority--[authority] using xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-updateAuthority-address-address-[`updateAuthority`].
```

> * Close and open a target via xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setTargetClosed-address-bool-[`setTargetClosed`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Closing or opening a target via xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setTargetClosed-address-bool-[`setTargetClosed`].
```

> * Allow a role to call a target function with xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setTargetFunctionRole-address-bytes4---uint64-[`setTargetFunctionRole`].

Reviewer: If this is technically correct...

```suggestion
* Changing permissions of whether a role can call a target function with xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setTargetFunctionRole-address-bytes4---uint64-[`setTargetFunctionRole`].
```

=== Using with Ownable

> Contracts already inheriting from xref:api:access.adoc#Ownable[`Ownable`] can migrate to the Access Manager by transferring ownership to the manager. After that, the ownable contract will be called through the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function. Even if the caller doesn't require a delay.

Reviewer 3: Does it mean something like the following?
```suggestion
Contracts already inheriting from xref:api:access.adoc#Ownable[`Ownable`] can migrate to the Access Manager by transferring ownership to the manager. After that, all calls to functions with the `onlyOwner` modifier should be called through the manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function, even if the caller doesn't require a delay.
```

> Contracts already inheriting from xref:api:access.adoc#Ownable[`Ownable`] can migrate to the Access Manager by transferring ownership to the manager. After that, all calls to functions with the `onlyOwner` modifier should be called through the manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function, even if the caller doesn't require a delay.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contracts already inheriting from xref:api:access.adoc#Ownable[`Ownable`] can migrate to AccessManager by transferring ownership to the manager. After that, all calls to functions with the `onlyOwner` modifier should be called through the manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function, even if the caller doesn't require a delay.
```

```javascript
ownable.transferOwnership(accessManager.address, { from: owner });
```

=== Using with AccessControl

> For systems already using xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`], the `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` can be granted to the AccessManager after revoking every other role. Subsequent calls should be made through the manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] method, similar to the ownable case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For systems already using xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`], the `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` can be granted to the `AccessManager` after revoking every other role. Subsequent calls should be made through the manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] method, similar to the Ownable case.
```

Operations executed by the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController[`TimelockController`] are not subject to a fixed delay but rather a minimum delay. Some major updates might call for a longer delay. For example, if a delay of just a few days might be sufficient for users to audit a minting operation, it makes sense to use a delay of a few weeks, or even a few months, when scheduling a smart contract upgrade.

The minimum delay (accessible through the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController-getMinDelay--[`getMinDelay`] method) can be updated by calling the xref:api:governance.adoc#TimelockController-updateDelay-uint256-[`updateDelay`] function. Bear in mind that access to this function is only accessible by the timelock itself, meaning this maintenance operation has to go through the timelock itself.

[[access-management]]
== Access Management

> Better role management can be achieved with an xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] instance. Instead of managing each contract's permission separately, AccessManager stores all the permissions in a single contract, making your protocol easier to audit and maintain.

Reviewer 3: "Better" is a strong claim -- we should be more specific on the scenarios in which it is better.

```suggestion
For a system of contracts, better integrated role management can be achieved with an xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] instance. Instead of managing each contract's permission separately, AccessManager stores all the permissions in a single contract, making your protocol easier to audit and maintain.
```

```

WARNING: Even if an `AccessManager` defines permissions for a target function, these won't be applied if the managed contract instance is not using the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-restricted--[`restricted`] modifier for that function, or if its manager is a different one.

=== Role Admins and Guardians

An important aspect of the AccessControl contract is that roles aren't granted nor revoked by role members. Instead, it relies on the concept of a role admin for granting and revoking.

In the case of the `AccessManager`, the same rule applies and only the role's admins are able to call xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-grantRole-uint64-address-uint32-[grant] and xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-revokeRole-uint64-address-[revoke] functions. Note that calling these functions will be subject to the execution delay that the executing role admin has.

Additionally, the `AccessManager` stores a _guardian_ as an extra protection for each role. This guardian has the ability to cancel operations that have been scheduled by any role member with an execution delay. Consider that a role will have its initial admin and guardian default to the `ADMIN_ROLE` (`0`).

> IMPORTANT: Be careful with the members of `ADMIN_ROLE`, since it acts as the default admin and guardian for every role. A misbehaved guardian can cancel operations at will, affecting the `AccessManager`'s operation.

Reviewer 3: The backticks aren't working well with the apostrophe.

```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Be careful with the members of `ADMIN_ROLE`, since it acts as the default admin and guardian for every role. A misbehaved guardian can cancel operations at will, affecting the AccessManager's operation.
```

=== Manager configuration

> The `AccessManager` provides a built-in interface for configuring permission settings that can be accessed by the `AccessManager`'s `ADMIN_ROLE` members.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `AccessManager` provides a built-in interface for configuring permission settings that can be accessed by its `ADMIN_ROLE` members.
```

Although xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`] offers a more dynamic solution for adding permissions to your contracts than Ownable, decentralized protocols tend to become more complex after integrating new contract instances and requires you to keep track of permissions separately in each contract. This increases the complexity of permissions management and monitoring across the system.

image::access-control-multiple.svg[Access Control multiple]

Protocols managing permissions in production systems often require more integrated alternatives to fragmented permissions through multiple `AccessControl` instances.

image::access-manager.svg[AccessManager]

The AccessManager is designed around the concept of role and target functions:

* Roles are granted to accounts (addresses) following a many-to-many approach for flexibility. This means that each user can have one or multiple roles and multiple users can have the same role.

> * Access to a restricted target function is restricted to one role. A target function is defined by one https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.20/abi-spec.html#function-selector[function selector] on one contract (called target). 

Reviewer 2: avoid saying restricted twice ?
```suggestion
* Access to a restricted target function is limited to one role. A target function is defined by one https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.20/abi-spec.html#function-selector[function selector] on one contract (called target). 
```

For a call to be authorized, the caller must bear the role that is assigned to the current target function (contract address + function selector).

image::access-manager-functions.svg[AccessManager functions]

=== Using `AccessManager`

OpenZeppelin Contracts provides xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] for managing roles across any number of contracts. The `AccessManager` itself is a contract that can be deployed and used out of the box. It sets an initial admin in the constructor who will be allowed to perform management operations.

> In order to restrict access to some functions of your contract, you should inherit from the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged[`AccessManaged`] contract provided along with the manager so that the `restricted` modifier is available to protect any externally facing function. Note you will have to set the address of the AccessManager instance (xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-constructor-address-[`initialAuthority`]) in the constructor so the `restricted` modifier can check permissions by calling the correct manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to restrict access to some functions of your contract, you should inherit from the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged[`AccessManaged`] contract provided along with the manager. This provides the `restricted` modifier that can be used to protect any externally facing function. Note that you will have to specify the address of the AccessManager instance (xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-constructor-address-[`initialAuthority`]) in the constructor so the `restricted` modifier knows which manager to use for checking permissions.
```

Here's a simple example of an xref:tokens.adoc#ERC20[`ERC20` token] that defines a `mint` function that is restricted by an xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`]:

```solidity
include::api:example$access-control/AccessManagedERC20MintBase.sol[]
```

> NOTE: Make sure you fully understand how xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager[`AccessManager`] works before using it or copy-pasting the examples from this guide.

Reviewer 2: On the one hand I understand why we say that, but I also want devs to use this approach even if they don't fully understand how timers are handled (that is quite tricky).

Author: Yep, but I don't think there's an easy way, especially when there are competing delays (eg. execution delay vs admin operations delay).

The only idea I have is to enable tooling to compare how delays play out (eg. visualizing delays between role members, or visualizing the key dates after scheduling operations or granting roles)

Once the managed contract has been deployed, it is now under the manager's control. The initial admin can then assign the minter role to an address and also allow the role to call the `mint` function. For example, this is demonstrated in the following Javascript code using Ethers.js:

> ```javascript
> const MINTER = 42n; // Roles are uint64 (0 is reserved for the ADMIN_ROLE)
> const target = await myToken.getAddress();
> 
> // Allow the minter role to call the function selector
> // corresponding to the mint function
> await manager.setTargetFunctionRole(
>     target,
>     ['0x40c10f19'], // bytes4(keccak256('mint(address,uint256)'))
>     MINTER,
>     { from: initialAdmin }
> );
> ```

Reviewer 2: the paragraph above says 
> can then assign the minter role to an address

so I guess we should also cover that part

```suggestion
```javascript
// const target = ...;
// const user = ...;
const MINTER = 42n; // Roles are uint64 (0 is reserved for the ADMIN_ROLE)

// Grant the minter role with no execution delay
await manager.grantRole(MINTER, user, 0);

// Allow the minter role to call the function selector
// corresponding to the mint function
await manager.setTargetFunctionRole(
    target,
    ['0x40c10f19'], // bytes4(keccak256('mint(address,uint256)'))
    MINTER
);
```
```

> Even though each role has its own list of function permissions, each role member (`address`) will have an execution delay that will dictate how long the account should wait to execute a function that requires its role. Delayed operations must have the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] function called on them first in the AccessManager before they can be executed, either by calling to the target function or using the AccessManager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though each role has its own list of function permissions, each role member (`address`) has an execution delay that will dictate how long the account should wait to execute a function that requires its role. Delayed operations must have the xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-schedule-address-bytes-uint48-[`schedule`] function called on them first in the AccessManager before they can be executed, either by calling to the target function or using the AccessManager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function.
```

Additionally, roles can have a granting delay that prevents adding members immediately. The AccessManager admins can set this grant delay as follows:

```javascript
const HOUR = 60 * 60;

const GRANT_DELAY = 24 * HOUR;
const EXECUTION_DELAY = 5 * HOUR;
const ACCOUNT = "0x...";
    

> await manager.setGrantDelay(MINTER, GRANT_DELAY, { from: initialAdmin });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await manager.connect(initialAdmin).setGrantDelay(MINTER, GRANT_DELAY);
```

// The role will go into effect after the GRANT_DELAY passes

> await manager.grantRole(MINTER, ACCOUNT, EXECUTION_DELAY, { from: initialAdmin }); 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await manager.connect(initialAdmin).grantRole(MINTER, ACCOUNT, EXECUTION_DELAY); 
```

The delayed admin actions are:

* Updating an `AccessManaged` contract xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManaged-authority--[authority] using xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-updateAuthority-address-address-[`updateAuthority`].
* Closing or opening a target via xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setTargetClosed-address-bool-[`setTargetClosed`].
* Changing permissions of whether a role can call a target function with xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-setTargetFunctionRole-address-bytes4---uint64-[`setTargetFunctionRole`].

=== Using with Ownable

Contracts already inheriting from xref:api:access.adoc#Ownable[`Ownable`] can migrate to AccessManager by transferring ownership to the manager. After that, all calls to functions with the `onlyOwner` modifier should be called through the manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] function, even if the caller doesn't require a delay.

```javascript

> const manager = await accessManager.getAddress();
> 
> await ownable.transferOwnership(manager, { from: owner });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await ownable.connect(owner).transferOwnership(accessManager);
```

```

=== Using with AccessControl

For systems already using xref:api:access.adoc#AccessControl[`AccessControl`], the `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` can be granted to the `AccessManager` after revoking every other role. Subsequent calls should be made through the manager's xref:api:access.adoc#AccessManager-execute-address-bytes-[`execute`] method, similar to the Ownable case.

```javascript
// Revoke old roles

> await accessControl.revokeRoke(MINTER_ROLE, account, { from: admin });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await accessControl.connect(admin).revokeRoke(MINTER_ROLE, account);
```

// Grant the admin role to the access manager

> const manager = await accessManager.getAddress();
> await accessControl.grantRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, manager, { from: admin });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await accessControl.connect(admin).grantRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, accessManager);
```

> await accessControl.renounceRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, admin, { from: admin });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await accessControl.connect(admin).renounceRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, admin);
```
